TikTok is no more a threat than American-owned social media sites that collect and sell user data.
The Washington Post and Pellaeon Lin, researcher at the University of Toronto’s Citizen Lab, both examined TikTok independently and came to the conclusion that TikTok “does not appear to collect any more data than your typical mainstream social network.” In fact, Facebook and Google both collect more personal data from users than TikTok.

As Lin argues, “Governments around the world are ignoring their duty to protect citizens’ private information, allowing big tech companies to exploit user information for gain. Governments should try to better protect user information, instead of focusing on one particular app without good evidence…. What I would call for is more evidence-based policy.”

Further, data security issues are endemic to the industry: “At Twitter, internal controls were so lax that an ex-employee was convicted of using his access to spy on Saudi dissidents, and a whistleblower said that the company had hired an employee in India who had used his access to spy on Indian dissidents.”

Rather than make TikTok a scapegoat for the social media industry, the U.S. government should better regulate the industry as a whole.

TikTok has no more dangerous information than other social media sites, and attempts to ban it are unconstitutional.
“For the average user, TikTok appears no more risky than Facebook. That’s not entirely a compliment,” explains technology columnist Geoffre Fowler.

“No government, as far as we know, has ever told Americans what they can or can’t download from an app store or access on the web,” TikTok states in a response to Montana’s ban.

Banning TikTok would violate the First Amendment of the U.S. Constitution. As activist Evan Greer explains, “The US government can’t ban you from posting or watching TikTok videos any more than they can stop you from reading a foreign newspaper like the Times of India or writing an opinion piece for The Guardian.” [40]

“Do we really want to emulate Chinese speech bans? We don’t ban things that are unpopular in this country,” states Senator Rand Paul (R-KY).

Further, banning TikTok amounts to the government criminalizing specific businesses without evidence of wrongdoing. Not only would TikTok itself suffer, but the many businesses that use the platform could also be decimated. TikTok estimates “nearly 5 million businesses seeking expansion and success, including countless small businesses,” use the app. Many small businesses rely solely on TikTok for promotion and sales.

The government shouldn’t be allowed to remove a legitimate revenue stream from TikTok influencers, whether the additional income is a small boost (small accounts report between $9 to $38 a day) or a large brand deal like that of Jon Seaton, football player for Elon University, who earned $250,000 through TikTok deals with Meta and Dr. Pepper.

The bottom line: banning speech and legal jobs is discriminatory, un-democratic, un-American, and unconstitutional.

Singling out China and TikTok for recriminations is xenophobic and rank political theater.
Xenophobia is the “fear and contempt of strangers or foreigners or of anything designated as foreign, or a conviction that certain foreign individuals and cultures represent a threat to the authentic identity of one’s own nation-state and cannot integrate into the local society peacefully.”

In other words, TikTok bans are being considered solely because the U.S. and state governments fear China.

Herb Lin, senior researcher at Stanford University’s Center for International Security and Cooperation, explains, “Nobody would be paying this kind of attention if it were British. It’s because it’s Chinese.”

“This is xenophobic. And it’s part of another Red Scare,” explains U.S. Representative Jamaal Bowman (D-NY). Far more dangerous, he says, was the 2016 Russian disinformation campaign, the amplification of toxic rhetoric preceding the Rohingya genocide in Myanmar, and the organization of Jan. 6, 2021 insurrectionists on Facebook—all were more dangerous than TikTok and its Chinese owner.

Plus, banning TikTok would give preference to American companies who commit the same data collection sins. Journalist Kara Swisher notes the bans will help other social media sites, primarily Facebook.

“Twitter,” she explains, “is no Nirvana garden party, it’s a very toxic place – and so this is a bigger issue that they [the U.S. government] should be dealing with, but in this case, they’re going to aim at TikTok because of the Chinese government.”

“I’m not at all saying TikTok is innocent, but focusing specifically on one app from one country is not going to solve whatever problem you think you’re solving. It truly misses the point. Do we really think that Facebook or Google are not capable of being influenced by the Chinese government? They know a market when they see one. I think the pressure that’s building is basically a race to be seen as tough on China,” concludes David Kahn Gillmor of the ACLU.

The chance of an everyday person being specifically targeted by the Chinese government is low. “If you’re not a defense contractor or you’re not someone who’s likely to be of specific interest to the Chinese government…then I would say your risk is much higher from Facebook and Instagram, all those things where those companies are doing the best to hire people to figure out how to make you more addicted to their product,” says Justin Cappos, engineering professor at New York University.

“I cannot stress this enough — the national security concerns are purely hypothetical. And rather hysterical,” argues CNN Senior Editor Allison Morrow.

Journalist Karl Bode calls the ban rhetoric “the great TikTok moral panic of 2023” and notes the uproar over TikTok is simply a purposeful distraction from the lack of larger policy solutions for the industry at large.

In the end, what we have here is “a big dumb performance in which we pretend that banning a single app actually does anything of use. After all, the Chinese, Russian, and U.S. governments can all just buy data from the poorly regulated data broker market. They don’t need TikTok for surveillance and propaganda; they have plenty of data brokers and U.S. tech giants for that,” Bode continues.

“Just that myopically fixating on the ban of one app — but doing nothing about the shitty policy environment that created the problem — is more political performance than meaningful solution. A performance that will annoy young voters, make it tougher on researchers and educators, uproot established community, face numerous First Amendment challenges, and not actually fix the core issues,” explains Bode.

Calls to ban TikTok gives politicians the opportunity to appear to be “tough on China” without pinpointing or addressing actual threats.